--- page 1 ---

Chapter 18
Difference in Differences
18.1 Introduction
One of the most popular ways to estimate the effect of a policy change is the method of difference
in differences, often called “diff in diffs” . Estimation is typically a two-way panel data regression with a
policy indicator as a regressor. Clustered variance estimation is generally recommended for inference.
In order to intrepret a difference in difference estimate as a policy effect there are three key condi-
tions. First, that the estimated regression is the correct conditional mean. In particular, this requires that
all trends and interactions are properly included. Second, that the policy is exogenous – it satisﬁes con-
ditional independence. Third, there are no other relevant unincluded factors coincident with the policy
change. If these assumptions are satisﬁed the difference in difference estimand is a valid causal effect.
18.2 Minimum Wage in New Jersey
The most well-known application of the difference in difference methodology is Card and Krueger
(1994) who investigated the impact of New Jersey’ s 1992 increase of the minimum hourly wage from
$4.25 to $5.05. Classical economics teaches that an increase in the minimum wage will lead to decreases
in employment and increases in prices. To investigate the magnitude of this impact the authors surveyed
a panel of 331 fast food restaurants in New Jersey during the period 2/15/1992-3/4/1992 (before the en-
actment of the minimum wage increase) and then again during the period 11/5/1992-12/31/1992 (after
the enactment). Fast food restaurants were selected for investigation as they are a major employer of
minimum wage employees. Before the change about 30% of the sampled workers were paid the mini-
mum wage of $4.25.
Table 18.1: Average Employment at Fast Food Restaurants
New Jersey Pennsylvania Difference
Before Increase 20.43 23.38 2.95
After Increase 20.90 21.10 0.20
Difference 0.47 −2.28 2.75
The data ﬁle CK1994 is extracted from the original Card-Krueger data set and is posted on the text-
book webpage.
650


--- page 2 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 651
Table 18.1 (ﬁrst column) displays the mean number1 of full-time equivalent employees2 at New Jer-
sey fast food restaurants before and after the minimum wage increase. Before the increase the average
number of employees was 20.4. After the increase the average number of employees was 20.9. Contrary
to the predictions of conventional theory employment slightly increased (by 0.5 employees per restau-
rant) rather than decreased.
This estimate – the change in employment – could be called a difference estimator. It is the change
in employment coincident with the change in policy. A difﬁculty in interpretation is that all employment
change is attributed to the policy. It does not provide direct evidence of the counterfactual – what would
have happened if the minimum wage had not been increased.
A difference in difference estimator improves on a difference estimator by comparing the change in
the treatment sample with a comparable change in a control sample.
Card and Krueger selected eastern Pennsylvania for their control sample. The minimum wage was
constant at $4.25 an hour in the state of Pennsylvania during 1992. At the beginning of the year starting
wages at fast food restaurants in the two states were similar. The two areas (New Jersey and eastern
Pennsylvania) share further similarities. Any trends or economic shocks which affect one state are likely
to affect both. Therefore Card and Krueger argued that it is appropriate to treat eastern Pennsylvania as
a control. This means that in the absence of a minimum wage increase they expected the same changes
in employment to occur in both New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania.
Card and Krueger surveyed a panel of 79 fast food restaurants in eastern Pennsylvania simultane-
ously while surveying the New Jersey restaurants. The average number of full-time equivalent employ-
ees is displayed in the second column of Table 18.1. Before the policy change the average number of
employees was 23.4. After the policy change the average number was 21.1. Thus in Pennsylvania average
employment decreased by 2.3 employees per restaurant.
Treating Pennsylvania as a control means comparing the change in New Jersey (0.5) with that in
Pennsylvnia (−2.3). The difference (2.75 employees per restaurant) is the difference-in-difference esti-
mate of the impact of the minimum wage increase. In complete contradiction to conventional economic
theory the estimate indicates an increase in employment rather than a decrease. This surprising estimate
has been widely discussed among economists3 and the popular press.
It is constructive to re-write the estimates from Table 18.1 in regression format. Let Yi t denote em-
ployment at restaurant i surveyed at time t. Let Statei be a dummy variable indicating the state, with
Statei = 1 for New Jersey and Statei = 0 for Pennsylvania. Let Timet be a dummy variable indicating
the time period, with Timet = 0 for the period before the policy change and Timet = 1 for the period
after the policy change. Let Di t denote a treatment dummy, with Di t = 1 if the minimum wage equals
$5.05 and Di t = 0 if the minimum wage equals $4.25. In this application it equals the interaction dummy
Di t =Statei Timet .
Table 18.1 is a saturated regression in the two dummy variables and can therefore be written as the
regression equation
Yi t = β0 + β1Statei + β2Timet + θDi t + εi t. (18.1)
Indeed the coefﬁcients can be written in terms of Table 18.1 by the following correspondence:
1Our calculations drop restaurants if they were missing the number of full-type equivalent employees in either survey.
2Following Card and Krueger full-time equivalent employees is deﬁned as the sum of the number of full-time employees,
managers, and assistant managers, plus one-half of the number of part-time employees.
3Most economists do not take the estimate literally – they do not believe that increasing the minimum wage will cause
employment increases. Instead it has been interpreted as evidence that small changes in the minimum wage may have only
minor impacts on employment levels.


--- page 3 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 652
New Jersey Pennsylvania Difference
Before Increase β0 + β1 β0 β1
After Increase β0 + β1 + β2 + θ β 0 + β2 β1 + θ
Difference β2 + θ β 2 θ
We see that the coefﬁcients in the regression (18.1) correspond to interpretable difference and differ-
ence in difference estimands. β1 is the difference estimand of the effect of “New Jersey vs. Pennsylvania”
in the period before the policy change. β2 is the difference estimand of the time effect in the control
state. θ is the difference in difference estimand – the change in New Jersey relative to the change in
Pennsylvania.
Our estimate of the regression (18.1) is
Yi t = 23.4
(1.4)
− 2.9
(1.5)
Statei − 2.3
(1.2)
Timet + 2.75
(1.34)
Di t + εi t. (18.2)
The standard errors are clustered by restaurant. As expected the coefﬁcient ˆθ on the treatment dummy
precisely equals the difference in difference estimate from Table 18.1. The coefﬁcient estimates can be
interpreted as described. The pre-change difference between New Jersey and Pennsylvania is −2.9 and
the time effect is −2.3. The difference in difference effect is 2.75. The t-statistic to test the hypothesis of
zero effect is just above 2 with an asymptotic p-value of 0.04.
Since the observations are divided into the groups Statei = 0 and Statei = 1 and Timet is equivalent
to a time index this regression is identical to a two-way ﬁxed effects regression of Yi t on Di t with state
and time ﬁxed effects. Furthermore, since the regressor Di t does not vary across individuals within the
state this ﬁxed effects regression is unchanged if restaurant-level ﬁxed effects are included instead of
state ﬁxed effects. (Restaurant ﬁxed effects are orthogonal to any variable demeaned at the state level.
See Exercise 18.1.) Thus the above regression is identical to the two-way ﬁxed effects regression
Yi t = θDi t + ui + vt + εi t (18.3)
where ui is a restaurant ﬁxed effect andvt is a time ﬁxed effect. The simplest method to implement this
is by a one-way ﬁxed effects regression with time dummies. The estimates are
Yi t = 2.75
(1.34)
Di t − 2.3
(1.2)
Timet + ui + εi t (18.4)
which are identical to the previous regression.
Equation (18.3) is the basic difference-in-difference model. It is a two-way ﬁxed effects regression of
the response Yi t on a binary policy Di t. The coefﬁcientθ corresponds to the double difference in sample
means and can be interpreted as the policy impact (also called the treatment effect) of D on Y . (We
discuss identiﬁcation in the next section.) Our presentation (and the Card-Krueger example) focuses on
the basic case of two aggregate units (states) and two time periods. The regression formulation (18.3) is
convenient as it can be easily generalized to allow for multiple states and time periods. Doing so provides
more convincing evidence of an identiﬁed policy effect. The equation (18.3) can also be generalized by
changing the trend speciﬁcation and by using a continuous treatment variable.
Another common generalization is to augment the regression with controls Xi t. This model is
Yi t = θDi t + X ′
i tβ + ui + vt + εi t (18.5)


--- page 4 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 653
Many empirical studies report estimates both of the basic model and regressions with controls. For
example we could augment the Card-Krueger regression to include the variable hoursopen, the number
of hours a day the restaurant is open. A restaurant with longer hours will tend to have more employees.
Yi t = 2.84
(1.31)
Di t − 2.2
(1.2)
Timet + 1.2
(0.4)
hoursopeni t + ui + εi t.
The estimated effect is that a restaurant employs an additional 1.2 employees for each hour open and
this effect is statistically signiﬁcant. The estimated treatment effect is not meaningfully changed.
18.3 Identiﬁcation
Consider the difference-in-difference equation (18.5) for i = 1, ...,N and t = 1, ...,T . We are interested
in conditions under which the coefﬁcientθ is the causal impact of the treatmentDi t on the outcome Yi t.
The answer can be found by applying Theorem 2.12 from Section 2.30.
In Section 2.30 we introduced the potential outcomes framework which writes the outcome as a
function of the treatment, controls, and unobservables. The outcome (e.g. employment at a restaurant)
is written as Y = h(D, X ,e) where D is treatment (minimum wage policy),X are controls, ande is a vector
of unobserved factors. Model (18.5) speciﬁes thath(D, X ,e) is separable and linear in its arguments and
that the unobservables consist of individual-speciﬁc, time-speciﬁc, and idiosyncratic effects.
We now present sufﬁcient conditions under which the coefﬁcient θ can be interpreted as a causal
effect. Recall the two-way within transformation (17.65) and set ¨Zi t =
( ¨Di t, ¨X ′
i t
)′.
Theorem 18.1 Suppose the following conditions hold:
1. Yi t = θDi t + X ′
i tβ + ui + vt + εi t.
2. E
[ ¨Zi t ¨Z ′
i t
]
> 0.
3. E[Xi tεi s] = 0 for all t and s.
4. Conditional on Xi 1, Xi 2,..., Xi T the random variables Di t and εi s are sta-
tistically independent for all t and s.
Then the coefﬁcientθ in (18.5) equals the average causal effect forD on Y con-
ditional on X .
Condition 1 states that the outcome equals the speciﬁed linear regression model which is additively
separable in the observables, individual effect, and time effect.
Condition 2 states that the two-way within transformed regressors have a non-singular design matrix.
This requires that all elements of Di t and Xi t vary across time and individuals.
Condition 3 is the standard exogeneity asumption for regressors in a ﬁxed-effects model.
Condition 4 states that the treatment variable is conditionally independent of the idiosyncratic error.
This is the conditional independence assumption for ﬁxed effects regression.
To show Theorem 18.1 apply the two-way within transformation (17.65) to (18.5). We obtain
¨Yi t = θ ¨Di t + ¨X ′
i tβ + ¨εi t.


--- page 5 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 654
Under Condition 2 the projection coefﬁcients (θ, β) are uniquely deﬁned and under Conditions 3 and 4
they equal the linear regression coefﬁcients. Thus θ is the regression derivative with respect to D. Con-
dition 4 implies that conditional on ¨Xi t the random variables ¨Di t and ¨εi s are statistically independent.
Theorem 2.12 shows that the regression derivative θ equals the average causal effect as stated.
The assumption that D and ε are independent is the fundamental exogeneity assumption. To in-
trepret θ as a treatment effect it is important that D is deﬁned as the treatment and not simply as an
interaction (time and state) dummy. This is subtle. Examine equation (18.5) recalling that D is deﬁned
as the treatment (an increase in the minimum wage). In this equation the error εi t contains all variables
and effects not included in the regression. Thus if there are other changes in New Jersey which are coin-
cident with the minimum wage increase the assumption thatD and ε are independent means that those
coincident changes are independent of ε and thus do not affect employment. This is a strong assump-
tion. Once again, Condition 4 states that all other effects which are coincident with the minimum wage
increase have no effect on employment. Without this assumption it would not be possible to claim that
the diff-in-diff regression identiﬁes the causal effect of the treatment.
Furthermore, independence of Di t and εi s means that neither can be affected by the other. This
means that the policy (treatment) was not enacted in response to knowledge about the response vari-
able in either period and it means that the outcome (employment) did not change in the ﬁrst period in
anticipation of the upcoming policy change.
It is difﬁcult to know if the exogeneity ofD is a reasonable assumption. It is similar to instrument exo-
geneity in instrumental variable regression. Its validity hinges on a well-articulated structural argument.
An empirical investigation based on a difference-in-difference speciﬁcation needs to make an explicit
case for exogeneity of D similar to that for IV regression.
In the case of the Card-Krueger application the authors argue that the policy was exogeneous because
it was adopted two years before taking effect. At the time of the passage of the legislation the economy
was in an expansion but by the time of adoption the economy has slipped into recession. This suggests
that it is credible to assume that the policy decision in 1990 was not affected by employment levels in
1992. Furthermore, concern about the impact of the increased minimum wage during a recession led
to a serious discussion about reversing the policy, meaning that there was uncertainty about whether
or not the policy would actually be enacted at the time of the ﬁrst survey. It thus seems credible that
employment decisions at that time were not determined in anticipation of the upcoming minimum wage
increase.
The authors do not discuss, however, whether or not there were other coincident events in the New
Jersey or Pennsylvania economies during 1992 which could have affected employment differentially in
the two states. It seems plausible that there could have been many such coincident events. This seems
to be the greatest weakness in their identiﬁcation argument.
Identiﬁcation (the conditions for Theorem 18.1) also requires that the regression model is correctly
speciﬁed. This means that the true model is linear in the speciﬁed variables and all interactions are
included. Since the basic 2 × 2 speciﬁcation is a saturated dummy variable model it is necessarily a
conditional mean and thus correctly speciﬁed. This is not the case in applications with more than two
states or time periods and thus model speciﬁcation needs to be carefully considered in such cases.
18.4 Multiple Units
The basic difference-in-difference model has two aggregate units (e.g. states) and two time peri-
ods. Additional information can be obtained if there are multiple units or multiple time periods. In this
section we focus on the case of multiple units. There can be multiple treatment units, multiple control
units, or both. In this section we suppose that the number of periods is T = 2. Let N1 ≥ 1 be the number


--- page 6 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 655
of untreated (control) units, and N2 ≥ 1 be the number of treated units, with N = N1 + N2.
The basic regression model
Yi t = θDi t + ui + vt + εi t
imposes two strong restrictions. First, that all units are equally affected by time as vt is common across
i . Second, that the treatment effect θ is common across all treated units.
The Card-Krueger data set only contains observations from two states but the authors did record
additional variables including the region of the state. They divided New Jersey into three regions (North,
Central, and South) and eastern Pennsylvania into two regions (1 for northeast Philadelphia suburbs and
2 for the remainder).
Table 18.2 displays the mean number of full-time equivalent employees by region, before and after
the minimum wage increase. We observe that two of the three New Jersey regions had nearly identical
increases in employment and all three changes are small. We can also observe that both of the Pennsyl-
vania regions had employment decreases though with different magnitudes.
We can test the assumption of equal treatment effect θ by a regression exclusion test. This can be
done by adding interaction dummies to the regression and testing for the exclusion of the interactions.
As there are three treated regions in New Jersey we include two of the three New Jersey region dummies
interacted with the time index. In general we would include N2 − 1 such interactions. These coefﬁcients
measure the treatment effect difference across regions. Testing that these two coefﬁcients are zero we
obtain a p-value of 0.60 which is far from signiﬁcant. Thus we accept the hypothesis that the treatment
effect θ is common across the New Jersey regions.
In contrast, when the treatment effect θ varies we call this a heterogeneous treatment effect. It is
not a violation of the treatment effect framework but it can be considerably more complicated to ana-
lyze. (A model which incorrectly imposes a homogeneous treatment effect is misspeciﬁed and produces
inconsistent estimates.)
A more serious problem arises if the control effect is heterogeneous. The control effect is the change
in the control group. Table 18.2 breaks down the estimated control effect across the two Pennsylvania
regions. While both estimates are negative they are somewhat different from one another. If the effects
are distinct there is not a homogeneous control effect. We can test the assumption of equal control effects
by a regression exclusion test. As there are two Pennsylvania regions we include the interaction of one
of the Pennsylvania regions with the time index. (In general we would include N1 − 1 interactions.) This
coefﬁcient measures the difference in the control effect across the regions. We test that this coefﬁcient is
zero obtaining a t-statistic of 1.2 and a p-value of 0.23. It is not statistically signiﬁcant, meaning that we
cannot reject the hypothesis that the control effect is homogeneous.
In contrast, if the control effect were heterogeneous then the difference-in-difference estimation
strategy is misspeciﬁed. The method relies on the ability to identify a credible control sample. Therefore
if a test for equal control effects rejects the hypothesis of homogeneous control effects this should be
taken as evidence against interpretation of the difference-in-difference parameter as a treatment effect.
Table 18.2: Average Employment at Fast Food Restaurants
South NJ Central NJ North NJ PA 1 PA 2
Before Increase 16.6 22.0 22.0 24.8 22.2
After Increase 17.3 21.4 22.7 21.0 21.2
Difference 0.7 −0.6 0.7 −3.8 −1.0


--- page 7 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 656
18.5 Do Police Reduce Crime?
DiTella and Schargrodsky (2004) use a difference-in-difference approach to study the question of
whether the street presence of police ofﬁcers reduces car theft. Rational crime models predict that the
the presence of an observable police force will reduce crime rates (at least locally) due to deterrence. The
causal effect is difﬁcult to measure, however, as police forces are not allocated exogenously, but rather
are allocated in anticipation of need. A difference-in-difference estimator requires an exogenous event
which changes police allocations. The innovation in DiTella-Schargrodsky was to use the police response
to a terrorist attack as exogenous variation.
In July 1994 there was a horriﬁc terrorist attack on the main Jewish center in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Within two weeks the federal government provided police protection to all Jewish and Muslim buildings
in the country. DiTella and Schargrodsky (2004) hypothesized that their presence, while allocated to
deter a terror or reprisal attack, would also deter other street crimes such as automobile theft locally to
the deployed police. The authors collected detailed information on car thefts in selected neighborhoods
of Buenos Aires for April-December 1994, resulting in a panel for 876 city blocks. They hypothesized
that the terrorist attack and the government’ s response were exogenous to auto thievery and is thus a
valid treatment. They postulated that the deterrence effect would be strongest for any city block which
contained a Jewish institution (and thus police protection). Potential car thiefs would be deterred from a
burglary due to the threat of being caught. The deterrence effect was expected to weaken as the distance
from the protected sites increased. The authors therefore proposed a difference-in-difference estimator
based on the average number of car thefts per block, before and after the terrorist attack, and between
city blocks with and without a Jewish institution. Their sample has 37 blocks with Jewish institutions (the
treatment sample) and 839 blocks without an institution (the control sample).
The data ﬁleDS2004 is a slightly revised version of the author’ s AER replication ﬁle and is posted on
the textbook webpage.
Table 18.3: Number of Car Thefts by City Block
Same Block Not on Same Block Difference
April-June 0.112 0.095 −0.017
August-December 0.035 0.105 0.070
Difference −0.077 0.010 −0.087
Table 18.3 displays the average number of car thefts per block, separately for the months before the
July attack and the months after the July attack, and separately for city blocks which have a Jewish insti-
tution (and therefore received police protection starting in late July) and for other city blocks. We can see
that the average number of car thefts dramatically decreased in the protected city blocks, from 0.112 per
month to 0.035, while the average number in non-protected blocks was near-constant, rising from 0.095
to 0.105. Taking the difference in difference we ﬁnd that the effect of police presence decreased car thefts
by 0.087, which is about 78%.
A general way to estimate a diff-in-diff model is a regression of the form (18.3) where Yi t is the num-
ber of car thefts on block i during month t, and ui and vt are block and month ﬁxed effects. This regres-
sion4 yields the same estimate of 0.087 since the panel is balanced and there are no control variables.
The model (18.3) makes the strong assumption that the treatment effect is constant across the ﬁve
treated months. We investigate this assumption in Table 18.4 which breaks down the car thefts by month.
For the control sample the number of car thefts is near constant across the months. For seven of the eight
4We omit the observations for July as the car theft data is only for the ﬁrst half of the month.


--- page 8 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 657
Table 18.4: Number of Car Thefts by City Block
Same Block Not on Same Block Difference
Pre-Attack April 0.112 0.110 −0.012
May 0.088 0.100 0.012
June 0.128 0.076 −0.052
Post-Attack August 0.047 0.111 0.064
September 0.014 0.099 0.085
October 0.061 0.108 0.047
November 0.027 0.100 0.073
December 0.027 0.106 0.079
months the average number per block ranges from 0.10 to 0.11, with only one month (June) a bit lower
at 0.08. In the treatment sample the average number of thefts per block in the three months before the
terrorist atack are similar to the averages in the control sample. But in the ﬁve months following the
attack the number of car thefts is uniformly reduced. The averages range from 0.014 to 0.061. In each
month after the attack the control sample has lower thefts with averages ranging from 0.047 to 0.085.
Given the small sample size (37) of the treatment sample this is strikingly uniform evidence.
We can formally test the homogeneity of the treatment effect by including four dummy variables for
the interactions of four post-attack months with the treatment sample and then testing the exclusion of
these variables. The p-value for this test is 0.81, exceedingly far from signiﬁcant. Thus there is no reason
in the data to be suspicious of the homogeneity assumption.
The goal was to estimate the causal effect of police presence as a deterrence for crime. Let us evaluate
the case for identiﬁcation. It seems reasonable to treat the terrorist attack as exogenous. The government
response also appears exogenous. Neither is reasonably related to the auto theft rate. We also observe
that the evidence in Tables 18.3 and 18.4 indicates that theft rates were similar in the pre-attack treatment
and control samples. Thus the additional police protection seems credibly provided for the purpose of
attack prevention rather than as an excuse for crime prevention. The general homogeneity of the theft
rate across months, once allowing for the treatment effect, gives credibility to the claim that the police
response was a causal effect. The terror attack itself did not reduce car theft rates as there seems to be no
measurable effect outside of the treatment sample. Finally, while the paper does not explicitly address
whether or not there was any other coincident event in July 1994 which may have effected these speciﬁc
city blocks it is difﬁcult to conceive of an alternative explanation for such a large effect. Our conclusion
is that this is a strong identiﬁcation argument. Police presence greatly reduces the incidence of car theft.
The authors asserted the inference that police presence deters crime more broadly. This is a tenuous
extension as the paper does not provide direct evidence of this claim. While it may seem reasonable we
should be cautious about making generalizations without supporting evidence.
Overall, DiTella and Schargrodsky (2004) is an excellent example of a well-articulated and credibly
identiﬁed difference-in-difference estimate of an important policy effect.
18.6 Trend Speciﬁcation
Some applications (including the two introduced earlier in this chapter) apply to a short period of
time such as one year in which case we may not expect the variables to be trended. Other applications
cover many years or decades in which case the variables are likely to be trended. These trend can reﬂect
long-term growth, business cycle effects, changing tastes, or many other features. If trends are incor-


--- page 9 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 658
rectly speciﬁed then the model will be misspeciﬁed and the estimated policy effect will be inconsistent
due to omitted variable bias. Consider the difference-in-difference equation (18.5). This model imposes
the strong assumption that the trends in Yi t are entirely explained by the included controls Xi t and the
common unobserved time component vt . This can be quite restrictive. It is reasonable to expect that
trends may differ across units and are not fully captured by observed controls.
One way to think about this is in terms of overidentiﬁcation. For simplicity suppose there are no
controls and the panel is balanced. Then there are N T observations. The two-way model with a policy
effect has N + T coefﬁcients. Unless N = T = 2 this model is overidentiﬁed. In addition to considering
heterogeneous treatment effects it is reasonable to consider heterogeneous trends.
One generalization is to include interactions of a linear trend with a control variable. This model is
Yi t = θDi t + X ′
i tβ + Z ′
i δt + ui + vt + εi t.
It speciﬁes that the trend inYi t differs across units depending on the controls Zi .
A broader generalization is to include unit-speciﬁc linear time trends. This model is
Yi t = θDi t + X ′
i tβ + ui + vt + t wi + εi t. (18.6)
In this model wi is a time trend ﬁxed effect which varies across units. If there are no controls this model
has 2N + T coefﬁcients and is identiﬁed as long asT ≥ 4.
Estimation of model (18.6) can be done one of three ways. If N is small (for example, applications
with state-level data) the regression can be estimated using the explicit dummy variable approach. Let
di and St be dummy variables indicating the i t h unit and t t h time period. Set di t = di t, the interaction
of the individual dummy with the time trend. The equation is estimated by regression of Yi t on Di t, Xi t,
di , St , and di t. Equivalently, one can apply one-way ﬁxed effects with regressorsDi t, Xi t, St , and di t.
When N is large a computationally more efﬁcient approach is to use residual regression. For each
unit i , estimate a time trend model for each variable Yi t, Di t, Xi t and St . That is, for each i estimate
Yi t = ˆα0 + ˆα1t + ˙Yi t.
This is a generalized within transformation. The residuals ˙Yi t are used in place of the original observa-
tions. Regress ˙Yi t on ˙Di t, ˙Xi t, and ˙St to obtain the estimates of (18.6).
The relevance of the trend ﬁxed effects vt can be assessed by a signiﬁcance test. Speciﬁcally, the
hypothesis that the coefﬁcients on the period dummies are zero can be tested using a standard exclusion
test. Similarly, trend interaction terms can be tested for signiﬁcance using standard exclusion tests. If
the tests are statistically signiﬁcant this indicates that their inclusion is relevant for correct speciﬁcation.
Unfortunately, the unit-speciﬁc linear time trends cannot be tested for signiﬁcance when the covariance
matrix is clustered at the unit level. This is similar to the problem of testing the signiﬁcance of a dummy
variable with a single observation. The unit-speciﬁc time trends can only be tested for signiﬁcance if the
covariance matrix is clustered at a ﬁner level. Otherwise the covariance matrix estimate is singular and
biased downwards. Naïve tests will over-state signiﬁcance.
18.7 Do Blue Laws Affect Liquor Sales?
Historically many U.S. states prohibited or limited the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays. These
laws are known as “blue laws” . In recent years these laws have been relaxed. Have these changes led
to increased consumption of alcoholic beverages? Bernheim, Meer and Novarro (2016) investigated this
question using a detailed panel on alcohol consumption and sales hours. It is possible that observed
changes coincident with changes in the law might reﬂect underlying trends. The fact that different states


--- page 10 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 659
changed their laws during different years allows for a difference-in-difference methodology to identify
the treatment effect.
The paper focuses on distilled liquor sales though wine and beer sales are also included in their data.
An abridged version of their data set BMN2016 is posted on the textbook webpage. Liquor is measured
in per capita gallons of pure ethanol equivalent. The data are state-level for 47 U.S. states for the years
1970-2007, unbalanced.
The authors carefully gathered information on the allowable hours that alcohol can be sold on a Sun-
day. They make a distinction between off-premise sales (liquor stores, supermarkets) where consump-
tion is off-premise, and on-premise sales (restaurants, bars) where consumption is on-premise. Let Yi t
denote the natural logarithm of per-capita liquor sales in state i in year t. A simpliﬁed version of their
basic model is
Yi t = 0.011
(0.003)
OnHoursi t + 0.003
(0.003)
OffHoursi t − 0.013
(0.004)
URi t (18.7)
+ 0.029
(0.008)
OnOutFlowsi t − 0.000
(0.010)
OffOutFlowsi t + ui + vt + εi t.
OnHours and OffHours are the number of allowable Sunday on-premises and off-premises sale hours.
UR is the state unemploment rate. OnOutFlows (OffOutFlows) is the weighted number of on(off)-premises
sale hours less than neighbor states. These are added to adjust for possible cross-border transactions.
The model includes both state and year ﬁxed effects. The standard errors are clustered by state.
The estimates indicate that increased on-premise sale hours lead to a small increase in liquor sales.
This is consistent with alcohol being a complementary good in social (restaurant and bar) settings. The
small and insigniﬁcant coefﬁcient onOffHours indicates that increased off-premise sale hours does not
lead to an increase in liquor sales. This is consistent with rational consumers who adjust their purchases
to known hours. The negative effect of the unemployment rate means that liquor sales are pro-cyclical.
The authors were concerned whether their dynamic and trend speciﬁcations were correctly speci-
ﬁed so tried some alternative speciﬁcations and interactions. To understand the trend issue we plot in
Figure 18.1 the time-series path of the log of per-capita liquor sales for three states: California, Iowa, and
New York. You can see that all three exhibit a downward trend from 1970 until about 1995 and then an
increasing trend. The slopes of the three trends, however, are not identical. This suggests that there is
both a national common component as well as a localized component.
If we augment the basic model to include state-speciﬁc linear trends the estimates are as follows.
Yi t = 0.000
(0.002)
OnHoursi t + 0.002
(0.002)
OffHoursi t − 0.015
(0.004)
URi t (18.8)
+ 0.005
(0.005)
OnOutFlowsi t − 0.005
(0.005)
OffOutFlowsi t + t wi + ui + vt + εi t.
The estimated coefﬁcient forOnHours drops to zero and becomes insigniﬁcant. The other estimates do
not change meaningfully. The authors only discuss this regression in a footnote stating that adding state-
speciﬁc trends “demands a great deal from the data and leaves too little variation to identify the effects
of interest.” This is an unfortunate claim as actually the standard errors have decreased, not increased,
indicating that the effects are better identiﬁed. The trouble is thatOnHours and OffHours are trended and
the trends vary by state. This means that these variables are correlated with the state-trend interaction.


--- page 11 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 660
-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
(a) California
-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 (b) Iowa
-.8 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 (c) New York
Figure 18.1: Log of Per-Capita Liquor Sales
Omitting the trend interaction induced omitted variable bias. That explains why the coefﬁcient estimates
change when the trend speciﬁcation changes.
Bernheim, Meer and Novarro (2016) is an excellent example of meticulous empirical work with care-
ful attention to detail and isolating a treatment strategy. It is also a good example of how attention to
trend speciﬁcation can affect results.
18.8 Check Your Code: Does Abortion Impact Crime?
In a highly-discussed paper, Donohue and Levitt (2001) used a difference-in-difference approach
to develop an unusual theory. Crime rates fell dramatically throughout the United States in the 1990s.
Donohue and Levitt postulated that one contributing explanation was the landmark 1973 legalization
of abortion. The latter might affect the crime rate through two potential channels. First, it reduced the
cohort size of young males. Second, it reduced the cohort size of young males at risk for criminal behav-
ior. This suggests the substantial increase in abortions in the early 1970s will translate into a substantial
reduction in crime 20 years later.
As you might imagine this paper was controversial on several dimensions. The paper was also metic-
ulous in its empirical analysis, investigating the potential links using a variety of tools and differing levels
of granularity. The most detailed-oriented regressions were presented at the very end of the paper where
the authors exploited differences across age groups. These regressions took the form
log(Arrestsi t b) = βAbortioni b + ui + λt b + θi t + εi t b
where i , t, and b index state, year, and birth cohort. Arrests is the raw number of arrests for a given crime
and Abortion is the ratio of abortions per live births. The regression includes state ﬁxed effects, cohort-
year interactions, and state-year interactions. By including all these interaction effects the regression is
estimating a triple-difference, and is identifying the abortion impact on within-state cross-cohort varia-
tion, which is a much stronger identiﬁcation argument than a simple cross-state diff-in-diff regression.
Donohue and Levitt reported an estimate of β equalling −0.028 with a small standard error. Based on
these estimates Donohue and Levitt suggest that legalizing abortion reduced crime by about 15-25%.
Unfortunately, their estimates contained an error. In an attempt to replicate Donohue-Levitt’ s work
Foote and Goetz (2008) discovered that Donohue-Levitt’ s computer code inadvertently omitted the state-
year interactions θi t. This was an important omission as without θi t the estimates are based on a mix


--- page 12 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 661
of cross-state and cross-cohort variation rather than just cross-cohort variation as claimed. Foote and
Goetz re-estimated the regression and found an estimate of β equalling −0.010. While still statistically
different from zero, the reduction in magnitude substantially decreased the estimated impact. Foote and
Gootz include more extensive empirical analysis as well.
Regardless of the errors and political ramiﬁcations the Donohue-Levitt paper is a very clever and cre-
ative use of the difference-in-difference method. It is unfortunate that this creative work was somewhat
overshadowed by a debate over computer code.
I believe there are two important messages from this episode. First, include the appropriate controls!
In the Donohue-Levitt regression they were correct to advocate for the regression which includes state-
year interactions as this allows the most precise measurement of the desired causal impact. Second,
check your code! Computation errors are pervasive in applied economic work. It is very easy to make
errors; it is very difﬁcult to clean them out of lengthy code. Errors in most papers are ignored as the
details receive minor attention. Important and inﬂuential papers, however, are scrutinized. If you ever
are so blessed as to write a paper which receives signiﬁcant attention you will ﬁnd it most embarrassing
if a coding error is found after publication. The solution is to be pro-active and vigilant.
18.9 Inference
Many difference-in-difference applications use highly aggregate (e.g. state level) data because they
are investigating the impact of policy changes which occur at an aggregate level. It has become custom-
ary in the recent literature to use clustering methods to calculate standard errors with clustering applied
at a high level of aggregation.
To understand the motivation for this choice it is useful to review the traditional argument for clus-
tered variance estimation. Suppose that the error ei g for individual i in group g is independent of the
regressors, has variance σ2, and has correlation ρ across individuals within the group. If the number
of individuals in each group is N then the exact variance of the least squares estimator (recall equation
(4.48)) is
V ˆβ =
(
X ′X
)−1 σ2 (
1 + ρ (N − 1)
)
as originally derived by Moulton (1990). This inﬂates the “usual” variance by the factor
(
1 + ρ (N − 1)
)
.
Even if ρ is very small, if N is huge then this inﬂation factor can be large as well.
The clustered variance estimator imposes no structure on the conditional variances and correlations
within each group. It allows for arbitrary relationships. The advantage is that the resulting variance esti-
mators are robust to a broad range of correlation structures. The disadvantage is that the estimators can
be much less precise. Effectively, clustered variance estimators should be viewed as constructed from
the number of groups. If you are using U.S. states as your groups (as is commonly seen in applications)
then the number of groups is (at most) 51. This means that you are estimating the covariance matrix
using 51 observations regardless of the number of “observations” in the sample. One implication is that
if you are estimating more than 51 coefﬁcients the sample covariance matrix estimator will not be full
rank which can invalidate potentially relevant inference methods.
The case for clustered standard errors was made convincingly in an inﬂuential paper by Bertrand,
Duﬂo, and Mullainathan (2004). These authors demonstrated their point by taking the well-known CPS
dataset and then adding randomly generated regressors. They found that if non-clustered variance esti-
mators were used then standard errors would be much too small and a researcher would inappropriately
conclude that the randomly generated “variable” has a signiﬁcant effect in a regression. The false rejec-
tions could be eliminated by using clustered standard errors, clustered at the state level. Based on the
recommendations from this paper, researchers in economics now routinely cluster at the state level.


--- page 13 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 662
There are limitations, however. Take the Card-Krueger (1994) example introduced earlier. Their sam-
ple had only two states (New Jersey and Pennsylvania). If the standard errors are clustered at the state
level then there are only two effective observations available for standard error calculation, which is
much too few. For this application clustering at the state level is impossible. One implication might be
that this casts doubts on applications involving just a handful of states. If we cannot rule out clustered
dependence structures, and cannot use clustering methods due to the small number of states, then it
may be inappropriate to trust the reported standard errors.
Another challenge arises when treatment (Di t = 1) applies to only a small number of units. The most
extreme case is where there is only one treated unit. This could arise, for example, when you are inter-
ested in measuring the effect of a policy which only one state has adopted. This situation is particularly
treacherous and is algebraically identical to the problem of robust covariance matrix estimation with
sparse dummy variables. (See Section 4.18.) As we learned from that analysis, in the extreme case of
a single treated unit the robust covariance matrix estimator is singular and highly biased towards zero.
The problem is because the variance of the sub-group is estimated from a single observation.
The same analysis applies to cluster-variance estimators. If there is a single treated unit then the
standard clustered covariance matrix estimator will be singular. If you calculate a standard error for the
sub-group mean it will be algebraically zero despite being the most imprecisely estimated coefﬁcient.
The treatment effect will have a non-zero reported standard error but it will be incorrect and highly
biased towards zero. For a more detailed analysis and recommendations for inference see Conley and
Taber (2011).
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
18.10 Exercises
Exercise 18.1 In the text it was claimed that in a balanced sample individual-level ﬁxed effects are or-
thogonal to any variable demeaned at the state level.
(a) Show this claim.
(b) Does this claim hold in unbalanced samples?
(c) Explain why this claim implies that the regressions
Yi t = β0 + β1Statei + β2Timet + θDi t + εi t
and
Yi t = θDi t + ui + δt + εi t
yield identical estimates of θ.
Exercise 18.2 In regression (18.1) with T = 2 and N = 2 suppose the time variable is omitted. Thus the
estimating equation is
Yi t = β0 + β1Statei + θDi t + εi t.
where Di t =Statei Timet is the treatment indicator.
(a) Find an algebraic expression for the least squares estimator ˆθ.
(b) Show that ˆθ is a function only of the treated sub-sample and is not a function of the untreated
sub-sample.


--- page 14 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 663
(c) Is ˆθ a difference-in-difference estimator?
(d) Under which assumptions might ˆθ be an appropriate estimator of the treatment effect?
Exercise 18.3 Take the basic difference-in-difference model
Yi t = θDi t + ui + δt + εi t.
Instead of assuming that Di t and εi t are independent, assume we have an instrumental variable Zi t
which is independent of εi t but is correlated with Di t. Describe how to estimate θ.
Hint: Review Section 17.28.
Exercise 18.4 For the speciﬁcation tests of Section 18.4 explain why the regression test for homoge-
neous treatment effects includes only N2 − 1 interaction dummy variables rather than all N2 interaction
dummies. Also explain why the regression test for equal control effects includes only N1 − 1 interaction
dummy variables rather than all N1 interaction dummies.
Exercise 18.5 An economist is interested in the impact of Wisconsin’ s 2011“ Act 10” legislation on wages.
(For background, Act 10 reduced the power of labor unions.) She computes the following statistics 5 for
average wage rates in Wisconsin and the neighboring state of Minnesota for the decades before and after
Act 10 was enacted.
Years Average Wage
Wisconsin 2001-2010 15.23
Wisconsin 2010-2020 16.72
Minnesota 2001-2010 16.42
Minnesota 2010-2020 18.10
(a) Based on this information, what is her point estimate of the impact of Act 10 on average wages?
(b) The numbers in the above table were calculated as county-level averages. (The economist was
given the average wage in each county. She calculated the average for the state by taking the aver-
age across the counties.) Now suppose that she estimates the following linear regression, treating
individual counties as observations.
w ag e = α + βAct10 + γWisconsin + δPost2010 + e
The three regressors are dummy variables for “ Act 10 in effect in the state” , “county is in Wisconsin” ,
and “time period is 2011-2020.”
What value of ˆβ does she ﬁnd?
(c) What value of ˆγ does she ﬁnd?
Exercise 18.6 Use the dataﬁle CK1994 on the textbook webpage. Classical economics teaches that in-
creasing the minimum wage will increase product prices. You can therefore use the Card-Krueger diff-
in-diff methodology to estimate the effect of the 1992 New Jersey minimum wage increase on product
prices. The data ﬁle contains the variables priceentree, pricefry and pricesoda . Create the variable price
as the sum of these three, indicating the cost of a typical meal.
5This numbers are completely ﬁctitious.


--- page 15 ---

CHAPTER 18. DIFFERENCE IN DIFFERENCES 664
(a) Some values of price are missing. Delete these observations. This will produce an unbalanced
panel as price may be missing for only one of the two surveys. Balance the panel by deleting the
paired observation. This can be accomplished in Stata by the commands:
• drop if price == .
• bys store: gen nperiods = [_N]
• keep if nperiods == 2
(b) Create an analog of Table 18.1 but with the price of a meal rather than the number of employees.
Interpret the results.
(c) Estimate an analog of regression (18.2) with price as the dependent variable.
(d) Estimate an analog of regression (18.4) with state ﬁxed effects and price as the dependent variable.
(e) Estimate an analog of regression (18.4) with restaurant ﬁxed effects and price as the dependent
variable.
(f) Are the results of these regressions the same?
(g) Create an analog of Table 18.2 for the price of a meal. Interpret the results.
(h) Test for homogeneous treatment effects across regions.
(i) Test for equal control effects across regions.
Exercise 18.7 Use the dataﬁleDS2004 on the textbook webpage. The authors argued that an exogenous
police presence would deter automobile theft. The evidence presented in the chapter showed that car
theft was reduced for city blocks which received police protection. Does this deterrence effect extend
beyond the same block? The dataset has the dummy variable oneblock which indicates if the city block
is one block away from a protected institution.
(a) Calculate an analog of Table 18.3 which shows the difference between city blocks which are one
block away from a protected institution and those which are more than one block away from a
protected institution.
(b) Estimate a regression with block and month ﬁxed effects which includes two treatment variables:
for city blocks which are on the same block as a protected institution, and for city blocks which are
one block away, both interacted with a post-July dummy. Exclude observations for July.
(c) Comment on your ﬁndings. Does the deterrence effect extend beyond the same city block?
Exercise 18.8 Use the dataﬁleBMN2016 on the textbook webpage. The authors report results for liquor
sales. The data ﬁle contains the same information for beer and wine sales. For either beer or wine sales,
estimate diff-in-diff models similar to (18.7) and (18.8) and interpret your results. Some relevant vari-
ables are id (state identiﬁcation),year, unempw (unemployment rate). For beer the relevant variables are
logbeer (log of beer sales), beeronsun (number of hours of allowed on-premise sales), beeroffsun (num-
ber of hours of allowed off-premise sales),beerOnOutﬂows, beerOffOutﬂows. For wine the variables have
similar names.


--- page 16 ---

Part V
Nonparametric Methods
665
