--- page 1 ---

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 What is Econometrics?
The term “econometrics” is believed to have been crafted by Ragnar Frisch (1895-1973) of Norway,
one of the three principal founders of the Econometric Society, ﬁrst editor of the journal Econometrica,
and co-winner of the ﬁrst Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1969. It is therefore ﬁtting
that we turn to Frisch’ s own words in the introduction to the ﬁrst issue of Econometrica to describe the
discipline.
A word of explanation regarding the term econometrics may be in order. Its deﬁnition
is implied in the statement of the scope of the [Econometric] Society, in Section I of the
Constitution, which reads: “The Econometric Society is an international society for the ad-
vancement of economic theory in its relation to statistics and mathematics.... Its main object
shall be to promote studies that aim at a uniﬁcation of the theoretical-quantitative and the
empirical-quantitative approach to economic problems....”
But there are several aspects of the quantitative approach to economics, and no single
one of these aspects, taken by itself, should be confounded with econometrics. Thus, econo-
metrics is by no means the same as economic statistics. Nor is it identical with what we call
general economic theory, although a considerable portion of this theory has a deﬁninitely
quantitative character. Nor should econometrics be taken as synonomous with the appli-
cation of mathematics to economics. Experience has shown that each of these three view-
points, that of statistics, economic theory, and mathematics, is a necessary, but not by itself
a sufﬁcient, condition for a real understanding of the quantitative relations in modern eco-
nomic life. It is the uniﬁcationof all three that is powerful. And it is this uniﬁcation that
constitutes econometrics.
Ragnar Frisch, Econometrica, (1933), 1, pp. 1-2.
This deﬁnition remains valid today, although some terms have evolved somewhat in their usage.
Today, we would say that econometrics is the uniﬁed study of economic models, mathematical statistics,
and economic data.
Within the ﬁeld of econometrics there are sub-divisions and specializations. Econometric theory
concerns the development of tools and methods, and the study of the properties of econometric meth-
ods. Applied econometrics is a term describing the development of quantitative economic models and
the application of econometric methods to these models using economic data.
1


--- page 2 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 2
1.2 The Probability Approach to Econometrics
The unifying methodology of modern econometrics was articulated by Trygve Haavelmo (1911-1999)
of Norway, winner of the 1989 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, in his seminal paper “The
probability approach in econometrics” (1944). Haavelmo argued that quantitative economic models
must necessarily be probability models (by which today we would mean stochastic). Deterministic mod-
els are blatently inconsistent with observed economic quantities, and it is incoherent to apply determin-
istic models to non-deterministic data. Economic models should be explicitly designed to incorporate
randomness; stochastic errors should not be simply added to deterministic models to make them ran-
dom. Once we acknowledge that an economic model is a probability model, it follows naturally that an
appropriate tool way to quantify, estimate, and conduct inferences about the economy is through the
powerful theory of mathematical statistics. The appropriate method for a quantitative economic analy-
sis follows from the probabilistic construction of the economic model.
Haavelmo’ s probability approach was quickly embraced by the economics profession. Today no
quantitative work in economics shuns its fundamental vision.
While all economists embrace the probability approach, there has been some evolution in its imple-
mentation.
The structural approach is the closest to Haavelmo’ s original idea. A probabilistic economic model
is speciﬁed, and the quantitative analysis performed under the assumption that the economic model
is correctly speciﬁed. Researchers often describe this as “taking their model seriously” . The structural
approach typically leads to likelihood-based analysis, including maximum likelihood and Bayesian esti-
mation.
A criticism of the structural approach is that it is misleading to treat an economic model as correctly
speciﬁed. Rather, it is more accurate to view a model as a useful abstraction or approximation. In this
case, how should we interpret structural econometric analysis? The quasi-structural approach to infer-
ence views a structural economic model as an approximation rather than the truth. This theory has led
to the concepts of the pseudo-true value (the parameter value deﬁned by the estimation problem), the
quasi-likelihood function, quasi-MLE, and quasi-likelihood inference.
Closely related is the semiparametric approach. A probabilistic economic model is partially spec-
iﬁed but some features are left unspeciﬁed. This approach typically leads to estimation methods such
as least squares and the Generalized Method of Moments. The semiparametric approach dominates
contemporary econometrics, and is the main focus of this textbook.
Another branch of quantitative structural economics is the calibration approach. Similar to the
quasi-structural approach, the calibration approach interprets structural models as approximations and
hence inherently false. The difference is that the calibrationist literature rejects mathematical statistics
(deeming classical theory as inappropriate for approximate models) and instead selects parameters by
matching model and data moments using non-statistical ad hoc1 methods.
Trygve Haavelmo
The founding ideas of the ﬁeld of econometrics are largely due to the Nor-
weigen econometrician Trygve Haavelmo (1911-1999). His advocacy of proba-
bility models revolutionized the ﬁeld, and his use of formal mathematical rea-
soning laid the foundation for subsequent generations. He was awarded the No-
bel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1989.
1Ad hoc means “for this purpose” – a method designed for a speciﬁc problem – and not based on a generalizable principle.


--- page 3 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 3
1.3 Econometric Terms and Notation
In a typical application, an econometrician has a set of repeated measurements on a set of variables.
For example, in a labor application the variables could include weekly earnings, educational attainment,
age, and other descriptive characteristics. We call this information the data, dataset, or sample.
We use the term observations to refer to distinct repeated measurements on the variables. An indi-
vidual observation often corresponds to a speciﬁc economic unit, such as a person, household, corpo-
ration, ﬁrm, organization, country, state, city or other geographical region. An individual observation
could also be a measurement at a point in time, such as quarterly GDP or a daily interest rate.
Economists typically denote variables by the italicized roman characters Y , X , and/or Z . The con-
vention in econometrics is to use the character Y to denote the variable to be explained, while the char-
acters X and Z are used to denote the conditioning (explaining) variables. Following mathematical prac-
tice, random variables and vectors are denoted by upper case roman characters such as Y and X . We
make an exception for equation errors which we typically denote by the lower case letters e, u or v.
Real numbers (elements of the real lineR, also called scalars) are written using lower case italics such
as x. Vectors (elements of Rk) are either written similarly using lower case italics, e.g.
x =




x1
x2
..
.
xk




or using by lower case bold italics such asx. We use bold in matrix algebraic expressions for compatibility
with matrix notation.
Matrices are written using upper case bold italics such asX . Our notation will not make a distinction
between random and non-random matrices. Typically we use U , V , X , Y , Z to denote random matrices
and use A, B, C , W to denote non-random matrices.
We denote the number of observations by the natural number n, and subscript the variables by the
index i to denote the individual observation, e.g. Yi . In some contexts we use indices other than i , such
as in time series applications where the index t is common. In panel studies we typically use the double
index i t to refer to individual i at a time period t.
We typically use Greek letters such as β, θ and σ2 to denote unknown parameters (scalar or vectors).
Parameter matrices are written using upper case Latin boldface, e.g. A. Estimators are typically denoted
by putting a hat “^” , tilde “~” or bar “-” over the corresponding letter, e.g. ˆβ and ˜β are estimators of β,
and ˆA is an estimator of A.
The covariance matrix of an econometric estimator will typically be written using the upper case
boldface V , often with a subscript to denote the estimator, e.g. V ˆβ = var
[ˆβ
]
as the covariance matrix for
ˆβ. Hopefully without causing confusion, we will use the notation V β = avar
[ˆβ
]
to denote the asymp-
totic covariance matrix of p
n
(ˆβ − β
)
(the variance of the asymptotic distribution). Covariance matrix
estimators will be denoted by appending hats or tildes, e.g. ˆV β is an estimator of V β.
1.4 Observational Data
A common econometric question is to quantify the causal impact of one set of variables on another
variable. For example, a concern in labor economics is the returns to schooling – the change in earnings
induced by increasing a worker’ s education, holding other variables constant. Another issue of interest
is the earnings gap between men and women.


--- page 4 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 4
Ideally, we would use experimental data to answer these questions. To measure the returns to
schooling, an experiment might randomly divide children into groups, mandate different levels of ed-
ucation to the different groups, and then follow the children’ s wage path after they mature and enter the
labor force. The differences between the groups would be direct measurements of the effects of differ-
ent levels of education. However, experiments such as this would be widely condemned as immoral!
Consequently, in economics experimental data sets are typically narrow in scope.
Instead, most economic data is observational. To continue the above example, through data collec-
tion we can record the level of a person’ s education and their wage. With such data we can measure the
joint distribution of these variables and assess their joint dependence. But from observational data it
is difﬁcult to infercausality as we are not able to manipulate one variable to see the direct effect on the
other. For example, a person’ s level of education is (at least partially) determined by that person’ s choices.
These factors are likely to be affected by their personal abilities and attitudes towards work. The fact that
a person is highly educated suggests a high level of ability, which suggests a high relative wage. This is an
alternative explanation for an observed positive correlation between educational levels and wages. High
ability individuals do better in school, and therefore choose to attain higher levels of education, and their
high ability is the fundamental reason for their high wages. The point is that multiple explanations are
consistent with a positive correlation between schooling levels and education. Knowledge of the joint
distribution alone may not be able to distinguish between these explanations.
Most economic data sets are observational, not experimental. This means that
all variables must be treated as random and possibly jointly determined.
This discussion means that it is difﬁcult to infer causality from observational data alone. Causal
inference requires identiﬁcation, and this is based on strong assumptions. We will discuss these issues
on occasion throughout the text.
1.5 Standard Data Structures
There are ﬁve major types of economic data sets: cross-sectional, time series, panel, clustered, and
spatial. They are distinguished by the dependence structure across observations.
Cross-sectional data sets have one observation per individual. Surveys and administrative records
are a typical source for cross-sectional data. In typical applications, the individuals surveyed are per-
sons, households, ﬁrms or other economic agents. In many contemporary econometric cross-section
studies the sample size n is quite large. It is conventional to assume that cross-sectional observations
are mutually independent. Most of this text is devoted to the study of cross-section data.
Time series data are indexed by time. Typical examples include macroeconomic aggregates, prices
and interest rates. This type of data is characterized by serial dependence. Most aggregate economic
data is only available at a low frequency (annual, quarterly, or monthly) so the sample size is typically
much smaller than in cross-section studies. An exception is ﬁnancial data where data are available at a
high frequency (daily, hourly, or by transaction) so sample sizes can be quite large.
Panel data combines elements of cross-section and time series. These data sets consist of a set of
individuals (typically persons, households, or corporations) measured repeatedly over time. The com-
mon modeling assumption is that the individuals are mutually independent of one another, but a given
individual’ s observations are mutually dependent. In some panel data contexts the number of time se-
ries observations T per individual is small while the number of individualsn is large. In other panel data


--- page 5 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 5
contexts (for example when countries or states are taken as the unit of measurement) the number of
individuals n can be small while the number of time series observations T can be moderately large. An
important issue in econometric panel data is the treatment of error components.
Clustered samples are increasing popular in applied economics and are related to panel data. In clus-
tered sampling the observations are grouped into “clusters” which are treated as mutually independent
yet allowed to be dependent within the cluster. The major difference with panel data is that clustered
sampling typically does not explicitly model error component structures, nor the dependence within
clusters, but rather is concerned with inference which is robust to arbitrary forms of within-cluster cor-
relation.
Spatial dependence is another model of interdependence. The observations are treated as mutually
dependent according to a spatial measure (for example, geographic proximity). Unlike clustering, spatial
models allow all observations to be mutually dependent, and typically rely on explicit modeling of the
dependence relationships. Spatial dependence can also be viewed as a generalization of time series
dependence.
Data Structures
• Cross-section
• Time-series
• Panel
• Clustered
• Spatial
As we mentioned above, most of this text will be devoted to cross-sectional data under the assump-
tion of mutually independent observations. By mutual independence we mean that the i t h observation
(Yi , Xi ) is independent of the j t h observation
(
Y j , X j
)
for i ̸= j . In this case we say that the data are inde-
pendently distributed. (Sometimes the label “independent” is misconstrued. It is a statement about the
relationship between observations i and j , not a statement about the relationship between Yi and Xi .)
Furthermore, if the data is randomly gathered, it is reasonable to model each observation as a draw
from the same probability distribution. In this case we say that the data are identically distributed.
If the observations are mutually independent and identically distributed, we say that the observations
are independent and identically distributed , i.i.d., or a random sample. For most of this text we will
assume that our observations come from a random sample.
Deﬁnition 1.1 The variables (Y i , Xi ) are a sample from the distribution F if
they are identically distributed with distribution F .


--- page 6 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 6
Deﬁnition 1.2 The variables (Yi , Xi ) are a random sample if they are mutually
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) across i = 1, ...,n.
In the random sampling framework, we think of an individual observation (Yi , Xi ) as a realization
from a joint probability distribution F
(
y, x
)
which we can call the population. This “population” is in-
ﬁnitely large. This abstraction can be a source of confusion as it does not correspond to a physical popu-
lation in the real world. It is an abstraction since the distributionF is unknown, and the goal of statistical
inference is to learn about features of F from the sample. The assumption of random sampling provides
the mathematical foundation for treating economic statistics with the tools of mathematical statistics.
The random sampling framework was a major intellectual breakthrough of the late 19th century,
allowing the application of mathematical statistics to the social sciences. Before this conceptual devel-
opment, methods from mathematical statistics had not been applied to economic data as the latter was
viewed as non-random. The random sampling framework enabled economic samples to be treated as
random, a necessary precondition for the application of statistical methods.
1.6 Econometric Software
Economists use a variety of econometric, statistical, and programming software.
Stata is a powerful statistical program with a broad set of pre-programmed econometric and statisti-
cal tools. It is quite popular among economists, and is continuously being updated with new methods.
It is an excellent package for most econometric analysis, but is limited when you want to use new or less-
common econometric methods which have not yet been programed. At many points in this textbook
speciﬁc Stata estimation methods and commands are described. These commands are valid for Stata
version 16.
MATLAB, GAUSS, and OxMetrics are high-level matrix programming languages with a wide variety of
built-in statistical functions. Many econometric methods have been programed in these languages and
are available on the web. The advantage of these packages is that you are in complete control of your
analysis, and it is easier to program new methods than in Stata. Some disadvantages are that you have
to do much of the programming yourself, programming complicated procedures takes signiﬁcant time,
and programming errors are hard to prevent and difﬁcult to detect and eliminate. Of these languages,
GAUSS used to be quite popular among econometricians, but currently MATLAB is more popular.
An intermediate choice is R. R has the capabilities of the above high-level matrix programming lan-
guages, but also has many built-in statistical environments which can replicate much of the functionality
of Stata. R is the dominant programming language in the statistics ﬁeld, so methods developed in that
arena are most commonly available in R. Uniquely, R is open-source, user-contributed, and best of all,
completely free! A growing group of econometricians are enthusiastic fans of R.
For highly-intensive computational tasks, some economists write their programs in a standard pro-
gramming language such as Fortran or C. This can lead to major gains in computational speed, at the
cost of increased time in programming and debugging.
There are many other packages which are used by econometricians, include Eviews, Gretl, PcGive,
Python, Julia, RATS, and SAS.
As the packages described above have distinct advantages many empirical economists end up using
more than one package. As a student of econometrics you will learn at least one of these packages and
probably more than one. My advice is that all students of econometrics should develop a basic level of
familiarity with Stata, MATLAB, and R.


--- page 7 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 7
1.7 Replication
Scientiﬁc research needs to be documented and replicable. For social science research using obser-
vational data this requires careful documentation and archiving of the research methods, data manipu-
lations, and coding.
The best practice is as follows. Accompanying each published paper an author should create a com-
plete replication package (set of data ﬁles, documentation, and program code ﬁles). This package should
contain the source (raw) data used for analysis, and code which executes the empirical analysis and other
numerical work reported in the paper. In most cases this is a set of programs which may need to be ex-
ecuted sequentially. (For example, there may be an initial program which “cleans” and manipulates
the data, and then a second set of programs which estimate the reported models.) The ideal is full docu-
mentation and clarity. This package should be posted on the author(s) website, and posted at the journal
website when that is an option.
A complicating factor is that many current economic data sets have restricted access and cannot be
shared without permission. In these cases the data cannot be posted nor shared. The computed code,
however, can and should be posted.
Most journals in economics require authors of published papers to make their datasets generally
available. For example:
Econometrica states:
Econometrica has the policy that all empirical, experimental and simulation results must
be replicable. Therefore, authors of accepted papers must submit data sets, programs, and
information on empirical analysis, experiments and simulations that are needed for replica-
tion and some limited sensitivity analysis.
The American Economic Review states:
All data used in analysis must be made available to any researcher for purposes of replica-
tion.
The Journal of Political Economy states:
It is the policy of the Journal of Political Economy to publish papers only if the data used in
the analysis are clearly and precisely documented and are readily available to any researcher
for purposes of replication.
If you are interested in using the data from a published paper, ﬁrst check the journal’ s website, as
many journals archive data and replication programs online. Second, check the website(s) of the paper’ s
author(s). Most academic economists maintain webpages, and some make available replication ﬁles
complete with data and programs. If these investigations fail, email the author(s), politely requesting the
data. You may need to be persistent.
As a matter of professional etiquette, all authors absolutely have the obligation to make their data and
programs available. Unfortunately, many fail to do so, and typically for poor reasons. The irony of the
situation is that it is typically in the best interests of a scholar to make as much of their work (including
all data and programs) freely available, as this only increases the likelihood of their work being cited and
having an impact.
Keep this in mind as you start your own empirical project. Remember that as part of your end prod-
uct, you will need (and want) to provide all data and programs to the community of scholars. The greatest


--- page 8 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 8
form of ﬂattery is to learn that another scholar has read your paper, wants to extend your work, or wants
to use your empirical methods. In addition, public openness provides a healthy incentive for trans-
parency and integrity in empirical analysis.
1.8 Data Files for Textbook
On the textbook webpage http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/econometrics/ there are posted a num-
ber of ﬁles containing data sets which are used in this textbook both for illustration and for end-of-
chapter empirical exercises. For most of the data sets there are four ﬁles: (1) Description (pdf format);
(2) Excel data ﬁle; (3) Text data ﬁle; (4) Stata data ﬁle. The three data ﬁles are identical in content: the
observations and variables are listed in the same order in each, and all have variable labels.
For example, the text makes frequent reference to a wage data set extracted from the Current Popula-
tion Survey. This data set is namedcps09mar, and is represented by the ﬁles cps09mar_description.pdf ,
cps09mar.xlsx, cps09mar.txt, and cps09mar.dta.
The data sets currently included are
• AB1991
– Data ﬁle from Arellano and Bond (1991)
• AJR2001
– Data ﬁle from Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001)
• AK1991
– Data ﬁle from Angrist and Krueger (1991)
• AL1999
– Data ﬁle from Angrist and Lavy (1999)
• BMN2016
– Data ﬁle from Bernheim, Meer and Novarro (2016)
• cps09mar
– household survey data extracted from the March 2009 Current Population Survey
• Card1995
– Data ﬁle from Card (1995)
• CHJ2004
– Data ﬁle from Cox, B. E. Hansen and Jimenez (2004)
• CK1994


--- page 9 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 9
– Data ﬁle from Card and Krueger (1994)
• CMR2008
– Date ﬁle from Card, Mas, and Rothstein (2008)
• DDK2011
– Data ﬁle from Duﬂo, Dupas and Kremer (2011)
• DS2004
– Data ﬁle from DiTella and Schargrodsky (2004)
• FRED-MD and FRED-QD
– U.S. monthly and quarterly macroeconomic databases from McCracken and Ng (2015)
• Invest1993
– Data ﬁle from Hall and Hall (1993)
• LM2007
– Data ﬁle from Ludwig and Miller (2007) and Cattaneo, Titiunik, and Vazquez-Bare (2017)
• Kilian2009
– Data ﬁle from Kilian (2009)
• Koppelman
– Data ﬁle from Forinash and Koppelman (1993), Koppelman and Wen (2000) and Wen and
Koppelman (2001)
• MRW1992
– Data ﬁle from Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992)
• Nerlove1963
– Data ﬁle from Nerlov (1963)
• PSS2017
– Data ﬁle from Papageorgiou, Saam, and Schulte (2017)
• RR2010
– Data ﬁle from Reinhard and Rogoff (2010)


--- page 10 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 10
1.9 Reading the Manuscript
I have endeavored to use a uniﬁed notation and nomenclature. The development of the material is
cumulative, with later chapters building on the earlier ones. Nevertheless, every attempt has been made
to make each chapter self-contained so readers can pick and choose topics according to their interests.
To fully understand econometric methods it is necessary to have a mathematical understanding of its
mechanics, and this includes the mathematical proofs of the main results. Consequently, this text is self-
contained with nearly all results proved with full mathematical rigor. The mathematical development
and proofs aim at brevity and conciseness (sometimes described as mathematical elegance), but also at
pedagogy. To understand a mathematical proof it is not sufﬁcient to simply read the proof, you need to
follow it and re-create it for yourself.
Nevertheless, many readers will not be interested in each mathematical detail, explanation, or proof.
This is okay. To use a method it may not be necessary to understand the mathematical details. Accord-
ingly I have placed the more technical mathematical proofs and details in chapter appendices. These
appendices and other technical sections are marked with an asterisk (*). These sections can be skipped
without any loss in exposition.
The key concepts of matrix algebra and probability inequalities are reviewed in Appendices A & B.
It may be useful to read or review Appendix A.1-A.11 before starting Chapter 3, and review Appendix B
before Chapter 6. It is not necessary to understand all the material in the appendices. They are intended
to be reference material and some of the results are not used in this textbook.


--- page 11 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 11
1.10 Common Symbols
a scalar
a or a vector
A matrix
X random variable or vector
R real line
R+ positive real line
Rk Euclidean k space
P[A] probability
P[A |B] conditional probability
F (x) cumulative distribution function
π(x) probability mass function
f (x) probability density function
E[X ] mathematical expectation
E[Y |X = x], E[Y |X ] conditional expectation
var[X ] variance or covariance matrix
var[Y |X = x], var[Y |X ] conditional variance
cov(X ,Y ) covariance
P [Y |X = x], P [Y |X ] best linear predictor
corr(X ,Y ) correlation
X n sample mean
ˆσ2 sample variance
s2 biased-corrected sample variance
ˆθ estimator
s
(ˆθ
)
standard error of estimator
limn→∞ limit
plim
n→∞
probability limit
− → convergence
− →p convergence in probability
− →
d
convergence in distribution
Ln(θ) likelihood function
ℓn(θ) log-likelihood function
Iθ information matrix
N(0,1) standard normal distribution
N(µ, σ2) normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ2
χ2
k chi-square distribution with k degrees of freedom


--- page 12 ---

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION 12
I n n × n identity matrix
1n n × 1 vector of ones
tr A trace
A′ vector or matrix transpose
A−1 matrix inverse
A > 0 positive deﬁnite
A ≥ 0 positive semi-deﬁnite
∥a∥ Euclidean norm
∥A∥ matrix norm
def
= deﬁnitional equality
1{a} indicator function (1 if a is true, else 0)
≃ approximate equality
∼ is distributed as
log(x) natural logarithm
exp(x) exponential function
n∑
i =1
summation from i = 1 to n


--- page 13 ---

Part I
Regression
13
